If I closed my eyes, I could see her. It was Friday evening in July 1956. Thirty-one and travelling alone, my grandmother had just arrived at Mexico City’s Hotel Geneve. She’d be tired; she would have just stepped off a five-day bus journey from Toronto. More than 60 years later, I could relate. Twenty-six and travelling alone, I had listless bags under my eyes, and I was checking into the same hotel.
I arrived in Mexico City a few hours before – luckily by plane, but nevertheless exhausted from an overnight jaunt. I’ve been based in Medellín, Colombia, for the last four years, but Mexico City has always lured me. And now, I finally had an excuse to make the trip.
Amidst boxes of old letters belonging to my maternal grandmother Jean, my own mother had recently found her old tour itinerary for Mexico City; it listed the hotel room where my grandmother stayed, the sites she visited and receipts from the stores where she shopped.
Following her itinerary would be an experience, I thought. Perhaps something to pay homage to Jean. So, as her only granddaughter, there I was – ready for her spirit to guide me around the centuries-old city.
More than 60 years after her grandmother, Jean, arrived in Mexico City, writer Victoria Stunt decided to retrace her steps
My grandmother died when I was 14, and for years, she stood still in my memory as a patient woman with salt-and-pepper hair. Born in China to missionary parents, Jean spent her 20s and early 30s travelling throughout Canada and the United States as a nurse. She raised four kids in the small Canadian city of Thorold and cared for me, my brother and our cousins every summer in nearby Niagara Falls. She obliged us to write summer diaries, habitually loaded us in her minivan and drove us to a nearby pond to catch frogs. When I got tired of playing with the boys, we’d sit down in a quiet spot, I’d lean against her and she’d read me a book.
My grandmother didn’t tell me much about travelling in her younger years; according to my mother, Jean didn’t talk about herself a great deal. That’s why, we both concluded, reading through her old letters and documents was so intriguing. They acquainted us with a different version of Jean.
Stunt was inspired to travel to Mexico City after reading her grandmother's letters and sorting through her old documents (Credit: Credit: Victoria Stunt)
Stunt was inspired to travel to Mexico City after reading her grandmother's letters and sorting through her old documents (Credit: Victoria Stunt)
Back on that Friday night in 1956, she was young, single and unrestrained. She’d crossed two borders and travelled for days through dusty desert. At a time when many women were expected to stay home and keep house, my grandmother was unfettered in Mexico City – and at liberty to explore it on her own terms.
Based on her crumpled itinerary, Jean left Toronto with a loose tour that listed ‘at leisure in Mexico’ on the itinerary. She rode the Greyhound bus through Detroit, Michigan; Indianapolis, Indiana; Memphis, Tennessee; and Laredo, Texas. According to Jean – and as retold by her father Rundall in a letter to all his children – the ‘buses had gotten progressively shakier and shoddier as she travelled southward’. Several buses had broken down, as had their air conditioning systems.
Still, everything was going as programmed. “Alors – mañana – over the border!” wrote Rundall in another letter, sent to the Hamilton Hotel in Laredo, where Jean stayed at the US-Mexican border.
Like her grandmother, Stunt stayed in Mexico City’s Hotel Geneve
I wondered if my grandmother thought the journey warranted the destination. Hotel Geneve is grand today, and would have been in 1956. Opened in 1907, it was the first hotel in Mexico to admit women travelling alone. Fitting, I thought, for the sake of both Jean and I. The hotel felt like a destination in itself. With a floor-to-ceiling library and a heavy chandelier dominating the lobby, it looked like an old film set. I hardly left on my first day.
However, it seems Jean used Hotel Geneve purely as a base. My grandmother had a packed schedule during her short four-day stay. She’d go to Puebla, a city 135km south-east of Mexico City; to Teotihuacán, a pre-Aztec city settled in 400BC an hour north of the capital with ancient temples, plazas and pyramids spread throughout; and on a tour of Mexico City – although I wasn’t exactly sure where.
The Hotel Geneve was the first hotel in Mexico to admit women travelling alone (Credit: Credit: Hotel Geneve)
The Hotel Geneve was the first hotel in Mexico to admit women travelling alone (Credit: Hotel Geneve)
I’d be in the capital for just five days. And as I spent more time in the city, much of the trip became a game of comparison. I made my way down Paseo de la Reforma, a monumental street three streets up from the hotel, and I tried to imagine what my grandmother saw back then. There certainly wouldn’t be any of today’s glass skyscrapers. The iconic Angel of Independence would be there, towering over the avenue – although the following year, Mexico’s 1957 earthquake would hit, and the gold-covered statue would fall into pieces, later to be replaced.
I spent my days taking the metro around Mexico City, checking off not only the sites my grandmother might have visited but my own bucket list, too: the Coyoacán neighbourhood; the Vasconcelos library; and the Zócalo, a main square in the historical centre of Mexico City built on Aztec ruins.
At a time when many women were expected to stay home and keep house, my grandmother was unfettered in Mexico City
The Zócalo was somewhere I figured my grandmother had gone. A devout Catholic, Jean likely wouldn’t have missed the Metropolitan Cathedral, which was built on the square between 1573 and 1813. In fact, my grandmother rarely missed a Sunday mass. She’d even attend the same services I did with my Catholic school. And when it came time for the students to shake hands in peace near the end of mass, I’d whip my head around to find her. We’d catch eyes from across the church, and she’d hold up her hand in a peace sign. She was a constant, smiling face in the crowd.
I entered the Metropolitan Cathedral – something I thought Jean would be happy about – and then made my way to the centre of the Zócalo. I had my hands in my coat pocket, overcome by the square’s sheer size. Groups of families and friends walked by. But for me, standing idle as people whizzed past, it’d never felt so good to be alone.
Jean’s four-day itinerary included a day trip to Puebla and a tour of the ancient city of Teotihuacán (Credit: Credit: Victoria Stunt)
Jean’s four-day itinerary included a day trip to Puebla and a tour of the ancient city of Teotihuacán (Credit: Victoria Stunt)
Like many women today, travelling alone is something I do often. But despite speaking fluent Spanish and being based in Latin America for years, some loved ones still thought it’d be better for my partner to be my chaperone. For me, landing in a different country to explore solo still feels like a small push against the social system.
I wonder if Jean felt the same way 62 years ago. At the time, women in Canada were earning around 59 cents to the dollar. Women in Mexico had just got the right to vote in 1953 after years of fighting. Jean supported herself financially and wanted to explore the world; and when she did, she was giving the system a full-out shove.
As my trip progressed, I understood my grandmother was a more relentless traveller than I am. After sitting for five days on a bus, perhaps Jean felt she’d better squeeze everything in. I travelled to Teotihuacán on public transit, but never made the day trip to Puebla as she did. I did try to visit the stores where she shopped, since the addresses were listed on the receipts she kept. At one I found a hotel. The second boutique, simply listed at the ‘corner of Londres and Calle Génova’, was now either a convenience store, taco chain, an off-license liquor shop or a Starbucks.
Stunt made sure to visit the Metropolitan Cathedral, a site her grandmother, a devout Catholic, surely visited (Credit: Credit: Mark Kanning/Alamy)
Stunt made sure to visit the Metropolitan Cathedral, a site her grandmother, a devout Catholic, surely visited (Credit: Mark Kanning/Alamy)
As I retraced her steps, I thought about what drove Jean to break the mould. The needle pointed to her family. Her parents lived in China for 10 years starting in 1921 – in fact, the first time my grandmother travelled was from China to Canada, on a boat for three months as an infant while her parents were on sabbatical.

Landing in a different country to explore solo still feels like a small push against the social system

As an adult, Jean’s parents encouraged her to travel. For months, her mother sent letters convincing Jean to go with her to the Bahamas. They went together in 1955, and her father, Rundall, proudly commented on their trip in letters sent to the family – just as he did when Jean set off for Mexico.

Since moving to Colombia in my early 20s, I’ve never been able to fully explain why I’m there. One year quickly turned into four, and as I matured, the reasons I listed to my family varied. But while in Mexico, Jean reminded me just as her parents did for her, that there was no justification needed. Jean boarded the bus to Mexico City because she felt like it, and that was reason enough.

Following in her grandmother's footsteps reminded Stunt that she did not need to justify her desire to travel (Credit: Credit: Victoria Stunt)
Following in her grandmother's footsteps reminded Stunt that she did not need to justify her desire to travel (Credit: Victoria Stunt)
My grandmother met my grandfather the year after she returned to Canada from Mexico. They married in 1958, raised their family of four kids, and she continued working another 30 years as a nurse. Her adventurous spirit never faded, though. She’d drive across Canada with her kids – east one time, then west another. And she’d point out car number plates to her grandchildren, encouraging us to imagine far-off places.

Not long before she died, Jean went to China with her younger brother. She said she’d found the house where she was born using only an old photograph. Travelling to connect with the past, I now realise, must be a family trait.

Travel Journeys is a BBC Travel series exploring travellers’ inner journeys of transformation and growth as they experience the world.

Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.

If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "If You Only Read 6 Things This Week". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Capital and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

“Which form should I use when I talk to you: feminine or masculine?” I asked Lukas Avendaño, who I had seen in trousers earlier in the day but now was wearing a traditional black skirt with colourful embroidered flowers called an enagua. We were speaking in Spanish, with its gendered nouns and pronouns. “I prefer you’d just call me sweetheart,” Avendaño giggled.

There’s men and women and there’s something in between, and that’s who I am

Here, in the Istmo de Tehuantepec region in Mexico’s southern state of Oaxaca, there are three genders: female, male and muxes. This third classification has been acknowledged and celebrated since pre-Hispanic times, and it’s hard to imagine life without muxes here. But in this region where most people speak the indigenous Zapotec language, my question doesn’t make much sense.

“In Zapotec, as in English, there are no grammatical genders. There is only one form for all people. Muxes have never been forced to wonder: are they more man or woman?” Avendaño explained.

“We’re the third sex,” added Felina, who, unlike Avendaño, decided to change his given male name, Ángel, and goes only by this moniker. “There’s men and women and there’s something in between, and that’s who I am.”

I was at the Vigil of the Intrepids, the annual celebration of muxes that takes place each November in Juchitán de Zaragoza, a small town on the Istmo de Tehuantepec. Observing the different muxes, I couldn’t see much in common between their styles. There were muxes who, like the local tehuanas (women from the Istmo de Tehuantepec), wore the same richly embroidered outfits that inspired Frida Kahlo’s unique look. Others seemed to prefer Western-style dresses or drag queen apparel. And there were some wearing men’s clothes, showing their status with just simple makeup and nail polish.
“It’s hard to describe who a muxe is. Basically, we can say that a muxe is any person who was born a man but doesn’t act masculine,” Avendaño said.

“What we know, ‘under Western eyes’, as ‘male-to-female transvestite’, ‘male-to-female transsexual’, ‘effeminate gay’ or ‘masculine gay’ seems to be included within the category of ‘muxe’ as long as there is also a strong component of ethnic identity,” writes anthropologist Pablo Céspedes Vargas in his article Muxes at work: between community belonging and heteronormativity in the workplace. Avendaño similarly emphasised that ‘muxe’ is a Zapotec term and it can’t be understood without knowing more about their culture.

The Vela de Las Intrepidas takes place each November in Juchitán de Zaragoza (Credit: Credit: Ola Synowiec)
The Vela de Las Intrepidas (Vigil of the Intrepids) takes place each November in Juchitán de Zaragoza (Credit: Ola Synowiec)
That’s because the concept of muxe exists only here, on the Istmo de Tehuantepec, where they are an important part of the community. Some say they fell out from the pocket of Vicente Ferrer, the patron saint of Juchitán, as he passed through town, which, according to locals, means they were born under a lucky star. A second version of the saint’s legend says that Vicente Ferrer was carrying three bags: one with female seeds, one with male seeds and one where the two were mixed. According to this story, the third bag sprung a leak in Juchitán, and that’s the reason why there are so many muxes here.

“It’s not true there are more of them here. They’re just more respected, so they can be more visible,” said Fernando Noé Díaz, a primary school teacher who has many muxe friends. One named Kika (who also only goes by her first name) had invited us for tonight’s vela. There, each muxe had a section with tables and decorations where food and drinks were served to their guests. “I guess muxes are so respected because they are more a social gender rather than a sexual one. They have an important role in the community,” Noé Díaz added.

When the man is at sea or in the field and the woman is at the market, there is no-one to take care of the household and family – that’s where the muxe comes in

Juchitán is famous throughout Mexico for its strong and proud women. Some even call it a matriarchy, which is not necessarily correct, but women traditionally handle the money brought home by the men. (Locals joke that men here have sweet or salty penises, meaning they are either farmers or fishermen.) Women, on the other hand, are supposed to sell what men produce, and the market is their domain. Tonight, as is vela tradition, women traditionally donate money as a gift, while the men carry cases of beer.

“When the man is at sea or in the field and the woman is at the market, there is no-one to take care of the household and family. That’s where the muxe comes in,” Noé Díaz explained. “Some even say it’s a blessing for a mother to have a muxe son who will help her at home and take care of young siblings. Also, muxes are socially not allowed to have long-term relationships or get married so they can stay with their mothers when they get old.”

Some say muxes fell out from the pocket of Vicente Ferrer, the patron saint of Juchitán, as he passed through Juchitán (Credit: Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
Some say muxes fell out from the pocket of Vicente Ferrer, the patron saint of Juchitán, as he passed through Juchitán (Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
At the vela, the mothers are the ones who serve food at each muxe’s table. Kika's mother was checking that nobody was hungry, and younger family members gave me a new bottle of beer when mine started to empty. But Kika didn’t want to dedicate herself to housework, as is one of the muxe’s traditional roles, along with handicrafts and selling at the market. She owns a beauty salon in the centre of the town. The same with Felina, who runs a muxes’ group, Las Auténticas Intrepidas Buscadoras del Peligro (The Authentic Intrepid Danger Seekers), the organisers of tonight’s vela.

According to Noé Díaz, a lot of muxes work preparing the traditional fiestas that are a big part of the local economy. They make costumes and ornaments for velas, baptisms, communions, quinceañeras (15th birthday parties) and weddings. Noé Díaz also knows muxes who dedicate themselves to creating art and handicrafts to sell at markets. Another of his muxe friends is a primary-school teacher.

Muxes are more respected in Juchitán, so they can be more visible (Credit: Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
Fernando Noé Díaz: “It’s not true there are more of them here. They’re just more respected, so they can be more visible” (Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
Avendaño is an actor and director who travels the world with his show about being a muxe, Réquiem para un Alcaraván (Requiem for an Alcaravan). The spectacle puts a lot of emphasis on the Catholic part of the muxe identity.

God created woman and man, but he also created human nature

“Muxes have always had an important role in the local Catholic church. It was their job to prepare the church decorations. In Tehuantepec, the town I come from, muxes have their own brotherhood inside the church,” Avendaño said, explaining that the Catholic Church wisely accommodated the tradition of three genders that is so strong and deeply ingrained in the local culture.

Today’s celebration started with a holy mass in honour of muxes at the local church of Vicente Ferrer.

“God created woman and man, but he also created human nature, and – please forgive me, God, if I offend you – it’s possible that the nature created by him decided who humans are. And among people, there are homosexuals and it’s totally natural,” said ‘Padre Panchito’, as parish priest Arturo Francisco Herrera González is nicknamed, while he delivered his homily. “God created us in his image, and each one of us is unique. There are no two identical individuals and we have to respect that,” he stated.

A lot of muxes work preparing the traditional fiestas that are a big part of the local economy (Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
After mass, the traditional procession began through the streets of the town. The colourful crowd was led by a band and muxes carrying candles. Behind them, more muxes rode in cars and trucks decorated with flowers, balloons and paper decorations. But the highlight of the day was the party that took place at night outside town. There were three stages and big speakers. I could see many people: women, men and children. Everyone was wearing regional clothes: women in enaguas and embroidered blouses called huipiles; men in white guayabera shirts. All were welcomed on the stage by a muxe who was this year’s ‘la mayordomo’, the main organiser of the vela, who was accompanied by their partner who is a mayate. Mayates are men who have sexual relationships with muxes, but aren’t muxes themselves and are not considered gay.

“An important difference with urban Western sexual culture is that for Zapotecs, only sexual relationships between a muxe and a heterosexual male have meaning. Relations between muxes or between a muxe and a gay man don’t make sense, in fact they are even inconceivable. No muxe would sleep with a man who considers himself gay,” writes Marinella Miano Borruso in an article Entre lo local y lo global. Los muxe en el siglo XXI (Between local and global. Muxes in the 21st Century). “Zapotec society as a whole doesn’t perceive a man who has relations with a muxe as a homosexual, his hetero-status is not questioned.”

Muxes also play an important role in the local Catholic Church, making decorations for baptisms and weddings (Credit: Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
Muxes also play an important role in the local Catholic Church, making decorations for baptisms and weddings (Credit: Zofia Radzikowska)
According to Miano Borruso, historically muxes didn’t have to be homosexual. There were cases of them being heterosexual, bisexual or asexual. “Traditionally, being muxe didn’t depend on sexual orientation. It’s a cultural gender, social function and identity, but not a characteristic of someone’s desires,” she explains in her book Hombre, mujer y muxe en el Istmo de Tehuantepec (Man, woman and muxe in Istmo de Tehuantepec).

Nonetheless, all the muxes I talked to at the vela considered themselves homosexual or as a woman born in a male body. Some transform themselves with hormone therapy and implants. During the annual Queen of the Muxes contest, which formed part of the vela, I noticed many of them had artificial breasts. “That’s something new. Fake boobs don’t make a muxe more muxe,” Noé Díaz commented.

If we, the daughters of St Vicente, won’t fight for our rights, then who will?

Muxes have also been involved in the struggle for LGBT rights. Amaranta Gómez Regalado, a muxe from Juchitán, was a local candidate in the elections for the Mexican Congress. Even though she didn’t get enough votes, she became famously known as the first transsexual candidate of Mexico. She’s still involved in politics, especially in campaigns against homophobia and for HIV/AIDS prevention.

“Instead of dedicating our lives to embroidery, handicraft or street sales, more and more of us are getting higher education,” Felina said. “If we, the daughters of St Vicente, won’t fight for our rights, then who will?”

Still, Mexicans have been ambivalent towards homosexuals in general. On one hand, Mexico City was the first Latin American capital to legalise same-sex marriage. Yet Mexico also suffers one of the highest rates of crime against the LGBT community in the world, with 202 people murdered due to homophobia between January 2014 and December 2016 – which equates to one every three to four days.

For the Mexican and international gay community, Juchitán has become a queer paradise and a symbol of tolerance. Even though some locals still discriminate against muxes, and the muxe community as a whole has less opportunity to study and gain employment, the traditional indigenous division of three genders as a natural and traditional way of being has inspired the LGBT scene around the world – and muxes are becoming aware of it.

“We dedicate this night not only to muxes,” I hear from the stage. “It’s also your night, for all homosexuals, not just for the ones from the state of Oaxaca, but for all gays from all over the world. Juchitán is open to all of you.”

Our Unique World is a BBC Travel series that celebrates what makes us different and distinctive by exploring offbeat subcultures and obscure communities around the globe.

Tiny houses are everywhere. They’ve received heavy coverage in the media and there are millions of followers on dozens of pages on social media. While there is no census for these homes, they have seen a surge in popularity in the decade since the Great Recession – witness the prolific growth of tiny house manufacturers, for instance. Originating in the US, tiny homes have also been popping up across Canada, Australia and the UK.

Tiny houses are promoted as an answer to the affordable housing crisis; a desirable alternative to traditional homes and mortgages. Yet there are many complexities and contradictions that surround these tiny spaces, as I discovered when I began investigating them.

I have toured homes, attended tiny house festivals, stayed in a tiny house community and interviewed several dozen people who live inside them. My research took me throughout the US, from a converted accessory unit squeezed between two average size homes on Staten Island to a community in Florida full of cute and brightly coloured tiny structures – appropriately located just down the road from Disney World. Here are three things I unexpectedly discovered along the way.

Tiny homes and the housing ladder

Millennials have a complicated relationship with home ownership. They often still want to own a home but are simply not able to do it in the same way as their parents, and are known as ‘Generation Rent’ as a result.

So-called 'tiny homes' first emerged as a remedy to the affordable housing crisis, but they can actually pose surprising problems.
All the tiny-houser millennials that I interviewed wanted to own bigger houses in future; they saw tiny living as a means of owning something now and being able to save at the same time. Several young couples planned to upgrade once they had children, selling their tiny homes or even keeping them as guesthouses.

But if they saw these homes as a temporary option they would abandon as their lives progressed, it’s not always so straightforward in practice. Apart from the obvious challenge of saving enough to afford a bigger place, it’s not easy to sell tiny homes since they usually depreciate in value. And because they are not attached to land, there is often a question mark about their long-term viability as well.

Groundlessness

Tiny homes tend to be on wheels as a way of getting around government regulations on minimum habitable dwelling size. This often makes their inhabitants feel unsettled. In my own experience staying in a tiny home, I recall feeling a general awareness of the wheels underneath and a slight swaying as I jumped from the ladder that accessed the lofted bed.

As one interviewee who lives with his partner and small child on private land in rural Washington State told me:

It doesn’t feel that grounded; it feels like we are detached from the earth because there are wheels underneath us… It’s a constant reminder… you are in this fragile state of housing.

The majority of dwellers that I talked to were eager to live on a solid foundation in future. I met one millennial who used her college fund to build a beautifully crafted and customised tiny home, but felt so groundless after only a year of living on wheels that she was trying to sell.

The majority of dwellers that I talked to were eager to live on a solid foundation in future
This suggests that building codes will need to be relaxed to allow more tiny-housers to live on foundations. Some places have taken the lead on this already – one example is Spur, Texas, which has changed its relevant housing laws with the express intention of attracting tiny-housers in response to a declining population. Spur is pitching itself as the first tiny house friendly town in America.
Millennials around the world have struggled with making as much money as their parents and affording homes to buy (Credit: Alamy Stock Photo)
More broadly, however, the legalities around tiny homes remain complicated. They continue to restrict the potential for this lifestyle both in the US and elsewhere. In the UK, for instance, there can be issues with planning laws that require all new dwellings to have more than one bed space. In southwest England, Bristol City Council recently overruled such rules to allow several tiny homes to be built in the back garden of a terraced house in the suburbs, reckoning that it was necessary to help alleviate a local housing crisis.

Tiny homes ≠ tiny consumption
Tiny houses are often put forward as a more sustainable housing option. They are certainly a potential check on the continued pursuit of bigger houses and greater consumption of energy, building materials and so forth. Yet reducing your environmental impact by going tiny is not as simple as some have claimed.
I came across several tiny households that were using external storage spaces for items that wouldn’t fit in the home, for example. Referred to as a ‘dirty secret’ by one interviewee, another explained her desire to keep items from her previous home in case she changed her mind about tiny living.

Over half of my interviewees had a ‘one in, one out’ mentality, where they would throw away or donate one item to make space for something new

Over half of my interviewees had a ‘one in, one out’ mentality, where they would throw away or donate one item to make space for something new. As one dweller in her late 30s, who lives in a state-of-the-art home in a caravan park in rural New Hampshire, said, “I have a TK Maxx addiction. I still go out every couple months and buy a bunch of stuff then come home and decide which things to get rid of.”

Regardless of how tiny living is marketed by the enthusiasts, sustainability was not a major driver for most of the participants in my study. Instead it was almost an afterthought. It seemingly takes more than changing the size of a home to change the mentality of the people who live inside.
Life at the Burrow was as different as possible from life on Privet Drive. The Dursleys liked
everything neat and ordered; the Weasleys’ house burst with the strange and unexpected. Harry got a
shock the first time he looked in the mirror over the kitchen mantelpiece and it shouted, “Tuck your
shirt in, scruffy!” The ghoul in the attic howled and dropped pipes whenever he felt things were
getting too quiet, and small explosions from Fred and George’s bedroom were considered perfectly
normal. What Harry found most unusual about life at Ron’s, however, wasn’t the talking mirror or
the clanking ghoul: It was the fact that everybody there seemed to like him.
Mrs. Weasley fussed over the state of his socks and tried to force him to eat fourth helpings at
every meal. Mr. Weasley liked Harry to sit next to him at the dinner table so that he could bombard
him with questions about life with Muggles, asking him to explain how things like plugs and the
postal service worked.
“Fascinating.” he would say as Harry talked him through using a telephone. “Ingenious, really,
how many ways Muggles have found of getting along without magic.”
Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning about a week after he had arrived at the
Burrow. He and Ron went down to breakfast to find Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Ginny already
sitting at the kitchen table. The moment she saw Harry, Ginny accidentally knocked her porridge
bowl to the floor with a loud clatter. Ginny seemed very prone to knocking things over whenever
Harry entered a room. She dived under the table to retrieve the bowl and emerged with her face
glowing like the setting sun. Pretending he hadn’t noticed this, Harry sat down and took the toast
Mrs. Weasley offered him.
“Letters from school,” said Mr. Weasley, passing Harry and Ron identical envelopes of yellowish
parchment, addressed in green ink. “Dumbledore already knows you’re here, Harry — doesn’t miss
a trick, that man. You two’ve got them, too,” he added, as Fred and George ambled in, still in their
pajamas.
For a few minutes there was silence as they all read their letters. Harry’s told him to catch the
Hogwarts Express as usual from King’s Cross station on September first. There was also a list of the
new books he’d need for the coming year.
SECOND-YEAR STUDENTS WILL REQUIRE:
The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2by Miranda Goshawk
Break with a Banshee by Gilderoy Lockhart
Gadding with Ghouls by Gilderoy Lockhart
Holidays with Hags by Gilderoy Lockhart
43 Travels with Trolls by Gilderoy Lockhart
Voyages with Vampires by Gilderoy Lockhart
Wanderings with Werewolves by Gilderoy Lockhart
Year with the Yeti by Gilderoy Lockhart
Fred, who had finished his own list, peered over at Harry’s.
“You’ve been told to get all Lockhart’s books, too!” he said. “The new Defense Against the Dark
Arts teacher must be a fan — bet it’s a witch.”
At this point, Fred caught his mother’s eye and quickly busied himself with the marmalade.
“That lot won’t come cheap,” said George, with a quick look at his parents. “Lockhart’s books
are really expensive…”
“Well, we’ll manage,” said Mrs. Weasley, but she looked worried. “I expect we’ll be able to pick
up a lot of Ginny’s things secondhand.”
“Oh, are you starting at Hogwarts this year?” Harry asked Ginny.
She nodded, blushing to the roots of her flaming hair, and put her elbow in the butter dish.
Fortunately no one saw this except Harry, because just then Ron’s elder brother Percy walked in. He
was already dressed, his Hogwarts prefect badge pinned to his sweater vest.
“Morning, all,” said Percy briskly. “Lovely day.”
He sat down in the only remaining chair but leapt up again almost immediately, pulling from
underneath him a molting, gray feather duster — at least, that was what Harry thought it was, until
he saw that it was breathing.
“Errol!” said Ron, taking the limp owl from Percy and extracting a letter from under its wing.
“Finally— he’s got Hermione’s answer. I wrote to her saying we were going to try and rescue you
from the Dursleys.”
He carried Errol to a perch just inside the back door and tried to stand him on it, but Errol
flopped straight off again so Ron lay him on the draining board instead, muttering, “Pathetic.” Then
he ripped open Hermione’s letter and read it out loud:
“‘Dear Ron, and Harry if you’re there,
“`I hope everything went all right and that Harry is okay and that you didn’t do anything illegal to get
him out, Ron, because that would get Harry into trouble, too. I’ve been really worried and if Harry is all
right, will you please let me know at once, but perhaps it would be better if you used a different owl
because I think another delivery might finish your one off.
“I’m very busy with schoolwork, of course’— How can she be?” said Ron in horror. “We’re on
vacation! —‘and we’re going to London next Wednesday to buy my new books. Why don’t we meet in
Diagon Alley?
Let me know what’s happening as soon as you can. Love from Hermione.’”
“Well, that fits in nicely, we can go and get all your things then, too,” said Mrs. Weasley,
starting to clear the table. “What’re you all up to today?”
Harry, Ron, Fred, and George were planning to go up the hill to a small paddock the Weasleys
owned. It was surrounded by trees that blocked it from view of the village below, meaning that they
could practice Quidditch there, as long as they didn’t fly too high.
They couldn’t use real Quidditch balls, which would have been hard to explain if they had
escaped and flown away over the village; instead they threw apples for one another to catch. They
took turns riding Harry’s Nimbus Two Thousand, which was easily the best broom; Ron’s old
Shooting Star was often outstripped by passing butterflies.
Five minutes later they were marching up the hill, broomsticks over their shoulders. They had
asked Percy if he wanted to join them, but he had said he was busy. Harry had only seen Percy at
mealtimes so far; he stayed shut in his room the rest of the time.
“Wish I knew what he was up to,” said Fred, frowning. “He’s not himself. His exam results came
the day before you did; twelve O.W.L.s and he hardly gloated at all.”
“Ordinary Wizarding Levels,” George explained, seeing Harry’s puzzled look. “Bill got twelve,
too. If we’re not careful, we’ll have another Head Boy in the family. I don’t think I could stand the
shame.”
Bill was the oldest Weasley brother. He and the next brother, Charlie, had already left Hogwarts.
Harry had never met either of them, but knew that Charlie was in Romania studying dragons and
Bill in Egypt working for the wizard’s bank, Gringotts.
“Dunno how Mum and Dad are going to afford all our school stuff this year,” said George after
a while. “Five sets of Lockhart books! And Ginny needs robes and a wand and everything…”
Harry said nothing. He felt a bit awkward. Stored in an underground vault at Gringotts in
London was a small fortune that his parents had left him. Of course, it was only in the wizarding
world that he had money; you couldn’t use Galleons, Sickles, and Knuts in Muggle shops. He had
never mentioned his Gringotts bank account to the Dursleys; he didn’t think their horror of
anything connected with magic would stretch to a large pile of gold.
Mrs. Weasley woke them all early the following Wednesday. After a quick half a dozen bacon
sandwiches each, they pulled on their coats and Mrs. Weasley took a flowerpot off the kitchen
mantelpiece and peered inside.
“We’re running low, Arthur,” she sighed. “We’ll have to buy some more today…Ah well, guests
first! After you, Harry dear!”
And she offered him the flowerpot.
Harry stared at them all watching him.
“W-what am I supposed to do?” he stammered.
“He’s never traveled by Floo powder,” said Ron suddenly. “Sorry, Harry, I forgot.”
“Never?” said Mr. Weasley. “But how did you get to Diagon Alley to buy your school things last
year?”
“I went on the Underground —”
“Really?” said Mr. Weasley eagerly. “Were there escapators? How exactly —”
“Not now, Arthur,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Floo powder’s a lot quicker, dear, but goodness me, if
you’ve never used it before —”
“He’ll be all right, Mum,” said Fred. “Harry, watch us first.”
He took a pinch of glittering powder out of the flowerpot, stepped up to the fire, and threw the
powder into the flames.
With a roar, the fire turned emerald green and rose higher than Fred, who stepped right into it,
shouted, “Diagon Alley!” and vanished.
“You must speak clearly, dear,” Mrs. Weasley told Harry as George dipped his hand into the
flowerpot. “And be sure to get out at the right grate…”
“The right what?” said Harry nervously as the fire roared and whipped George out of sight, too.
“Well, there are an awful lot of wizard fires to choose from, you know, but as long as you’ve
spoken clearly —”
“He’ll be fine, Molly, don’t fuss,” said Mr. Weasley, helping himself to Floo powder too.
“But, dear, if he got lost, how would we ever explain to his aunt and uncle?”
“They wouldn’t mind,” Harry reassured her. “Dudley would think it was a brilliant joke if I got
lost up a chimney, don’t worry about that —”
“Well…all right…you go after Arthur,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Now, when you get into the fire,
say where you’re going.”
“And keep your elbows tucked in,” Ron advised.
“And your eyes shut,” said Mrs. Weasley. “The soot —”
“Don’t fidget,” said Ron. “Or you might well fall out of the wrong fireplace —”
“But don’t panic and get out too early; wait until you see Fred and George.”
Trying hard to bear all this in mind, Harry took a pinch of Floo powder and walked to the edge
of the fire. He took a deep breath, scattered the powder into the flames, and stepped forward; the
fire felt like a warm breeze; he opened his mouth and immediately swallowed a lot of hot ash.
“D-Dia-gon Alley,” he coughed.
It felt as though he was being sucked down a giant drain. He seemed to be spinning very fast —
the roaring in his ears was deafening — he tried to keep his eyes open but the whirl of green flames
made him feel sick —something hard knocked his elbow and he tucked it in tightly, still spinning
and spinning — now it felt as though cold hands were slapping his face — squinting through his
glasses he saw a blurred stream of fireplaces and snatched glimpses of the rooms beyond — his bacon
sandwiches were churning inside him — he closed his eyes again wishing it would stop, and then…
He fell, face forward, onto cold stone and felt the bridge of his glasses snap.
Dizzy and bruised, covered in soot, he got gingerly to his feet, holding his broken glasses up to
his eyes. He was quite alone, but where he was, he had no idea. All he could tell was that he was
standing in the stone fireplace of what looked like a large, dimly lit wizard’s shop — but nothing in
here was ever likely to be on a Hogwarts school list.
A glass case nearby held a withered hand on a cushion, a bloodstained pack of cards, and a
staring glass eye. Evil-looking masks stared down from the walls, an assortment of human bones lay
upon the counter, and rusty, spiked instruments hung from the ceiling. Even worse, the dark,
narrow street Harry could see through the dusty shop window was definitely not Diagon Alley.
The sooner he got out of here, the better. Nose still stinging where it had hit the hearth, Harry
made his way swiftly and silently toward the door, but before he’d got halfway toward it, two people
appeared on the other side of the glass — and one of them was the very last person Harry wanted to
meet when he was lost, covered in soot, and wearing broken glasses: Draco Malfoy.
Harry looked quickly around and spotted a large black cabinet to his left; he shot inside it and
pulled the doors closed, leaving a small crack to peer through. Seconds later, a bell clanged, and
Malfoy stepped into the shop.
The man who followed could only be Draco’s father. He had the same pale, pointed face and
identical cold, gray eyes. Mr. Malfoy crossed the shop, looking lazily at the items on display, and
rang a bell on the counter before turning to his son and saying, “Touch nothing, Draco.”
Clutching his broken glasses to his face, Harry stared around. He had emerged into a dingy
alleyway that seemed to be made up entirely of shops devoted to the Dark Arts. The one he’d just
left, Borgin and Burkes, looked like the largest, but opposite was a nasty window display of shrunken
heads and, two doors down, a large cage was alive with gigantic black spiders. Two shabby-looking
wizards were watching him from the shadow of a doorway, muttering to each other. Feeling jumpy,
Harry set off, trying to hold his glasses on straight and hoping against hope he’d be able to find a
way out of here.
An old wooden street sign hanging over a shop selling poisonous candles told him he was in
Knockturn Alley. This didn’t help, as Harry had never heard of such a place. He supposed he hadn’t
spoken clearly enough through his mouthful of ashes back in the Weasleys’ fire. Trying to stay calm,
he wondered what to do.
“Not lost are you, my dear?” said a voice in his ear, making him jump.
An aged witch stood in front of him, holding a tray of what looked horribly like whole human
fingernails. She leered at him, showing mossy teeth. Harry backed away.
“I’m fine, thanks,” he said. “I’m just —”
“HARRY! What d’yeh think yer doin’ down there?”
Harry’s heart leapt. So did the witch; a load of fingernails cascaded down over her feet and she
cursed as the massive form of Hagrid, the Hogwarts’ gamekeeper, came striding toward them, beetleblack eyes flashing over his great bristling beard.
“Hagrid!” Harry croaked in relief. “I was lost — Floo powder —”
Hagrid seized Harry by the scruff of the neck and pulled him away from the witch, knocking the
tray right out of her hands. Her shrieks followed them all the way along the twisting alleyway out
into bright sunlight. Harry saw a familiar, snow-white marble building in the distance — Gringotts